In this lecture, you'll learn about multi area OSPF through a lab demo.
So in the previous OSPF labs, we've had all our routers in Area 0,
as you can see in the topology diagram here. We've got five routers, R1 to R5. All of their interfaces
are in IP subnets that begin with 10, and previously, all the routers were in Area 0.
Let's see, this scenario now is that our network has been growing and we want to convert it to a
multi area network.
So we're going to have the same physical topology, but rather than having all of the interfaces in Area 0,
We're going to segment into an Area 0 and an Area 1.
Now, normally you would have multiple normal areas hanging off of Area 0, but because we've only got five
routers here,
I'm just going to have an Area 0 and an Area 1. So, routers R3 and R4 are going to be
backbone routers in Area 0. Router R2 and R5 are going to be ABRs with an interface in Area 0
and Area 1, and router R1 is going to be a normal router in Area 1. So the routers are already
configured all in Area 0. R3 and R4 are going to remain backbone routers in Area 0,
So we don't need to change any of the configuration on there, but we need to change R2 and R5.
On R2, we need to put interface FastEthernet0/0 on the right, into Area 1, and we need to
do the same for FastEthernet3/0 on R5, and on R1, we need to put all of its interfaces
into Area 1. Okay, so let's go on to the routers. So I've got all my routers configured with OSPF,
if I do a 'show IP route', you'll see that all the routers have got routes to all of the destinations and they're all
showing up as a type 'O' which is an intra area route. Meaning, it's in the same area, so that was on R1.
Over on the other side, R4, it's routing table is going to look similar. Again, with intra area routes.
So let's configure our ABRs first, so that was going to be R2 and R5. If I do a 'show run | section ospf'
on R2, I can see that it's being configured with Process 1 and I've
got a network statement that's putting all its interfaces into Area 0. So let's have a look at the topology again,
and I need network 10.1.0.0 to be in Area 0, and 10.0.0.0
to be in Area 1. So, let's fix that up. On R2, so back on to the command line, I'll go 'config t', 'router ospf 1',
and I'm going to remove this network statement. So I'll say 'no' and then copy and paste that in, and
then I'm going to say 'network 10.1.0.0
0.0.255.255'.
So all the interfaces that begin with a 10.0, and then we don't care what's after that, are going
to go into Area 0 and then,
network 10.0.0.0,
and again, I need to be careful with the wildcard mask here, and make it 0.0.255.255.
So anything beginning with 10.0 will go into Area 1, but I've been careful to make sure that my network
statements are not overlapping there. 10.1.X.X goes in Area 0, 10.0.X.X goes in Area 1. I'm getting
an error message about a mismatched area ID. The reason for that is if we go back to the network topology
diagram again, I haven't changed R1 yet. Its interfaces are still in Area 0. So on FastEthernet0/0,
on R1, it's Area 0, on the other side of that link, on FastEthernet0/0 on R2, it's Area 1.
So that's a mismatch right now, until I finished configuring R1 as well. That's why I'm getting
the error message. Before I do R1, I'll do my other ABR which is R5. So FastEthernet2/0
is the 10.1.0.0/16 the network and FastEthernet3/0 is the 10.0.0/16, so let's
configure that next.
So I'll go onto R5 and I'll do a 'do show run | section ospf', and give this a second to give me
the output. Then 'router ospf 1',
and I'm going to remove this old network statement because it's putting all of the 10.X.X.X networks into Area 0.
I don't want that, so I'll get it to that networks statement and I'll put in my new network statements,
which were for 10.1.0.0 0.0.255.255, a /16, goes into Area 0,
and network 10.0.0.0 0.0.255.255
goes into Area 1, and I'll get the error message again here. Again, coming from R1. There it is.
Okay, so that's my ABRs configured.
Lastly, I'll go into R1. I don't need to check the topology diagram again because I know that all
its interfaces are going to go into Area 1. So let's do a 'show run | section ospf', and I'll remove
the old network statement that is putting the networks into Area 0 again. So 'router ospf 1', 'no'
and then copy and paste,
and the new network statement will be, I want all of the interfaces, so they all begin with a 10, so I
can do 10.0.0.0 0.255.255.255 again, and now I'm going to put them into Area 1.
And now because the area does match on both sides of the link, I see the adjacencies coming up. It forms an adjacency
with R5 and it also forms an adjacency with R2. Okay now, if we look at our old 'show ip route', so this is
when I brought up earlier on R4, and you can see that all of my OSPF routes are intra area routes.
They all show up as a type 'O' because they all came from other routers in the same area. Now that I have
configured my multi area OSPF, if I do a 'show ip route', I expect that I'll see the 10.0.X.X networks
on R4 showing up as an inter area route because R4 is in Area 0, that was 10.0.X.X networks are in
Area 1. So you see the difference now, they are showing up as inter area routes, but right now, I haven't
configured summarization. So before I had
my 1, 2, 3, 4 networks that were coming from 10.0.X.X, and now, I've still got 4 networks coming
from 10.0.X.X.
So configuring different areas doesn't actually do us any good until we do the manual summarization
as well,
so let's do that next. So our summarization gets done again on our ABRs.
So looking back at the topology diagram, on R2, I'm going to summarize all of these individual
10.0.X.X/24 networks, into a 10.0.0.0/16 and advertise that into Area 0.
I'll do the same thing, from right to left, on R5 as well. Coming back in the other direction,
all of the individual 10.1.X.X/24 networks,
I'm going to summarize that to 10.1.0.0/16 and advertise that into Area 1.
So let's do that next,
so I'll jump on to my ABR router, R2. So on R2, The command is 'area 0 range 10.1.0.0',
and when we put in our network statements, we use a wildcard, but when we do our summary addresses,
we use a normal subnet mask.
So Area 0, I'm going to summarize 10.1.0.0/16,
and in the other direction for Area 1, the range is 10.0.0.0,
and again, 255.255.0.0.
And I need to do exactly the same commands on my ABR of R5,
so it's going to be 'area 0 range 10.1.0.0 255.255.0.0', and 'area 1 range 10.0.0.0 255.255.0.0'.
And what I should see now is that change on R4. So before, when I wasn't doing summarization, for all
of the routes that were coming from Area 1 into my R4 router in Area 0, I was getting an
individual /24 route for each of those. If I do a 'show ip route' now, then there you can see
the difference.
I don't have four individual /24s, I've just got that one /16 summary route.
So it's taking up less space in my router, less memory, taking up less resources on there. That's the
benefit we get from doing our multi area OSPF, and finally, I'll show you on R1, it's going to
be the same thing. If I do a 'show ip route' here, I'll just have a single summary route for the
10.1.0.0/16 routes, which are over in Area 0.